# Clinical-trials
This dataset includes information about major clinical trials that were initiated since 1984 till 2020.
The columns in this dataset are NCT, Sponsor, Title, Summary, Start_Year, Start_Month, Phase, Enrolment, Status and Condition. We will look more into each column now.
NCT:
NCT stands for national clinical trials and every clinical trial registered in the NCT registry will hold a unique identifier that holds for the identification of the trial and within the NCT registry that clinical trail holds all the necessary information about the trial. In this dataset, this column serves a similar purpose of being a unique key to each and every trial that is mentioned over here. We cannot see the same NCT ID for two trials.
Sponsor:
Every clinical trial conducted throughout the globe requires huge monetary investments in order to, let alone be completed, even be initiated. Thus comes the role of a sponsor. The sponsor is the organization that comes forward with an idea or an initiative after through research about a particular therapeutic field of their interest so that they could set their mark and thus develop a product that would benefit that field and the organization as well. In this dataset we can see multiple pharma giants as they have been the ones who have been involved in extensive research spending huge sum into their product’s development and thus are now regarded as the pharma giants. Each sponsor has been involved in multiple trials throughout the course of time making them be able to produce clinically beneficial and marketable products in their name.
Start_Year and Start_Month:
It is important to know when a particular trial has started in order to be able to decide how far the trial would have progressed at any given time even if no results are published or presented by any means. It also provides valuable information on how long has the trial been active and give an insight to the sponsor or other stake holders involved in it. As previously discussed, clinical trials are processes that are highly time taking and demands huge sum of money, and thus an insight on how long the trial is being conducted will be able to aid in the decision of sponsor to whether continue further, terminate or spend additionally in it.
Phase:
Every product when it steps into clinical part of its developmental life-cycle goes through three major phases before its market approval and one important phase that extends even after the release of the product into the market. The phases are numbered from one to four and completion of each phase leads to the commencement of the next one except for phase IV that never ceases to exist.
As the phase changes, goal of the clinical trials, the number of samples/subjects and the condition of them changes in order to provide proof about the product across different controlled settings. In this dataset this column denotes in what phase the specified clinical trial is currently in and this provides valuable information like how far it has come, how far there is for this product to get to the market, what kinds of goals are specified for the trial and many more.
Enrolment:
As previously discussed, through each phase, the goal of the trial changes and thus the number of subjects involved in it. As the pharmaceutical product moves through different phases, it is necessary for the trial to involve greater volumes of subjects in order to provide proof about the product’s viability and safety across a vast population. Here, the column provides the number of subjects enrolled in the study which provides insights on how vast the investigational product has been exposed and thus how valid a proof will it be able to generate about the product.
Status:
It is not always necessary for a sponsor to complete every trial it has initiated. At times for the benefit of the subjects or sponsor, it is important to terminate or temporarily suspend a clinical trial. This column represents the last known status about the trial providing insights on how far the trial, thus the idea/product, has progressed. 
Condition:
Every trial will focus itself around a particular disease or a medical condition (even if the subjects don’t have the condition at the time of enrolment). In this dataset this column helps us to understand what were the primary conditions of focus by multiple trials conducted and thus provide sense of hope that these conditions are being studied by the best of minds and will soon be easily manageable clinically. To a sponsor looking into insights like this would help in deciding their next field of interest and thus research on it.
Now that we have described the columns, we can now look into what we can do in terms of machine learning with this dataset. This can be considered a classic example of an unsupervised machine learning. No column in here can be considered as target/dependable column and thus it could only result in us analysing patterns about the happenings in the clinical trial world. However, patterns observed from this dataset like these would be highly insightful for the sponsor as it can give us patterns like what are the conditions studied which has highest trial completion, what are the highly probable ones to be terminated or suspended. How long has trials taken in particular condition or particular phase for completion or termination. How a particular sponsor has contributed for research in a particular condition/field. These are possible patterns that can be useful for all sponsor organizations to look into.
